Add EIP: Deterministic proposer lookahead (#9530)
ethereum/EIPs: EIPS/eip-7917.md

---
eip: 7917
title: Deterministic proposer lookahead
description: Pre-calculate and store a deterministic proposer lookahead in the beacon state at the start of every epoch
author: Lin Oshitani (@linoscope) <lin@nethermind.io>, Justin Drake (@JustinDrake) <justin@ethereum.org>
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-7917-deterministic-proposer-lookahead/23259
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2025-03-24
---

## Abstract

At the start of each epoch, pre-calculate and store in the `beacon_state` a deterministic `proposer_lookahead` for the next `MIN_SEED_LOOKAHEAD + 1` epochs.

## Motivation

Unlike RANDAO seeds, which have a deterministic lookahead of at least `MIN_SEED_LOOKAHEAD == 1` epochs, the beacon proposer schedule of epoch `N + 1` is not fully predictable from the beacon state during epoch `N`. The reason is that, under certain edge cases, the effective balances (EBs) of active validators—themselves used as input for proposer election in epoch `N + 1`—can change within epoch `N`.

> Based preconfirmation protocols rely on a deterministic proposer schedule for smooth operations. Since the beacon genesis, slashings and penalties that accumulate to at least 1 ETH can change EBs of active validators and lead to an unpredictable proposer schedule despite the RANDAO seed being known ahead of time. The increase of MaxEB with EIP-7251 increases effective balance unpredictability because rewards that accumulate to at least 1 ETH, validator consolidations, and deposits can grow EBs of active validators beyond 32 ETH.

Author: Good idea, done here: https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/9530/commits/e9232b8bf1c74e4b516c809d6d54b66246fe17c3

> Besides fixing next-slot proposer schedule non-determinism, this EIP makes it possible for the proposer schedule of the next epoch to be accessible to the application layer via the beacon root and a simple Merkle proof. This highly simplifies the implementation of on-chain components for based preconfirmation protocols.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Besides making the next-epoch proposer schedule deterministic, this EIP makes it possible for the proposer schedule to be accessible to the application layer via the beacon root and a simple Merkle proof. This highly simplifies the implementation of on-chain components for based preconfirmation protocols.
```

Author: Good find! Fixed in https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/9530/commits/d3707e5caaca82ec47260c4ce19bd4faacc79def

> Introducing a fully deterministic lookahead fixes a long-standing beacon chain design oversight. It will no longer be possible for validators to grind effective balances to manipulate the proposer schedule of the next epoch, and the analysis of effective balance grinding will collapse from what is currently a subtle analysis of EB edge cases to a trivial security analysis. Finally, the proposer lookahead gives CL clients ahead-of-time visibility over the next proposer which may simplify implementations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also a fully deterministic lookahead fixes a long-standing beacon chain design oversight. It will no longer be possible for validators to grind effective balances to manipulate the proposer schedule of the next epoch, and the analysis of effective balance grinding will collapse from what is currently a subtle analysis of EB edge cases to a trivial security analysis. Finally, the proposer lookahead gives CL clients ahead-of-time visibility over the next proposer which may simplify implementations.
```

Author: I would prefer to keep this one as original, it's a "conclusion" of the preceding text, rather than an "addition".

    # Fill in the last epoch with new proposer indices
    last_epoch_proposers = compute_proposer_indices(state, Epoch(get_current_epoch(state) + MIN_SEED_LOOKAHEAD))
    state.proposer_lookahead[last_epoch_start:] = last_epoch_proposers
```

See the [updated beacon chain specs](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/6a1d923730c0b368b5192e64f643f22c21451058/specs/fulu/beacon-chain.md) in consensus-specs for more details.

## Rationale

An alternative approach would be to cache the effective balances at the start of epoch `N` so it can be used to calculate the proposer lookahead at the start of epoch `N+MIN_SEED_LOOKAHEAD`. However, this approach would require additional footprint in the beacon state, and would not be able to provide the proposer lookahead to the EVM via the beacon root.

## Backwards Compatibility

No backward compatibility issues found.

## Test Cases

See [the spec tests](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/tree/6a1d923730c0b368b5192e64f643f22c21451058/tests/core/pyspec/eth2spec/test/fulu) in consensus-specs.

## Security Considerations

### First Block After the Fork

> The first block after the fork will calculate all lookaheads for epochs up to `MIN_SEED_LOOKAHEAD` ahead and fill the `proposer_lookahead` field in the beacon state.

Reviewer: why is it a security consideration, may be move this to specification section

Author: Agree with all the comments around not being a security consideration, let me try to restructure and move things around.

### Malicious Lookahead Alteration

A critical consideration for any proposer election mechanism is preventing validators from manipulating lookahead to gain an unfair advantage. This proposal does not increase the chances of such attacks, as we do not alter the “RANDAO delay” used in the lookahead—the lookahead of epoch `N` is still determined by the RANDAO of epoch `N - MIN_SEED_LOOKAHEAD - 1` (which becomes available at the start of epoch `N - MIN_SEED_LOOKAHEAD`). The only difference is that it changes the “effective balances delay”: rather than using the effective balances (EB) at the start of epoch `N`, it now uses the EB at the start of epoch `N - MIN_SEED_LOOKAHEAD`.

Furthermore, by aligning the RANDAO and effective balances in this way, the proposal removes any chance of validators adjusting their EB after seeing the RANDAO outcome, which is an attack vector to consider. No such attack has been found so far, but this change removes the possibility, hence simplifying the security analysis.

### Single Secret Leader Election Compatibility

> In the future, we may introduce a Single Secret Leader Election (SSLE) mechanism in which only the selected validator knows their role until they propose a block. However, current SSLE designs still rely on a lookahead, albeit an encrypted one. In such designs, we could reuse the `proposer_lookahead` field by changing its type to something like `List[EncryptedValidatorIndex]`. And if a construction were to remove lookahead entirely, we could simply set `proposer_lookahead` to an empty list, meaning this wouldn’t be a blocker.

Reviewer: again not sure this is a security consideration but a consideration w.r.t. to future features

Author: Agree, thanks for pointing out! Moved to the rational section, as considering future compatibility is something to rationalize about https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/9530/commits/e9232b8bf1c74e4b516c809d6d54b66246fe17c3

That said, any such changes would introduce additional complexity around preconfirmation protocols, but that complexity arises regardless of this EIP.

### Added Computation at the Epoch Boundary

> Before this EIP, consensus clients only needed to compute the current proposer’s index at each slot. With the changes introduced by this EIP, they must calculate the entire epoch’s proposer schedule at the start of each epoch. However, computing the proposer index is light, involving sampling validators until we reach a validator with sufficient effective balance to be selected as a proposer. Still, testing is needed to confirm that these additional calculations do not create performance bottlenecks in practice.

Reviewer: again not a security consideration, move to specification

Author: Agreed again, moved to the "rational" part too https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/9530/commits/e9232b8bf1c74e4b516c809d6d54b66246fe17c3

Thanks!
